So, guys, now in this lecture, we will we will going to learn how to use bits as bullet flats.
So to start with, let us take an example.
So let us take our variable E, which is nothing but an unsigned 16 bit variable and let us assign the
value just one to this variable.
So the memory representation of this variable a, which is initialized to one, would look something
like this.
You can see all the bits are set to zero, except the least significant bit is initialized to one.
So this is how one is represented in the computer's memory.
Similarly, if the variable value is changed to two, you can see that the second least significant
bit is set to one.
Whereas the rest of all the bits is set to zero.
And I presume that you are already familiar how to convert the decimal number to its equal and binary
form.
You will find that two is represented in the binary form with having second least significant bit value
equal to one.
Whereas rest of the bits is set to zero.
And the same goes with value for the third least, significant bit will be one, whereas the rest of
the bits will be zero.
All right.
So you can notice the pattern that as long as the value of eight is a power of two, only one bit in
the memory is set, whereas the rest of the bits is set to zero.
So, for example, it can be represented as to rest of the power three.
In other words, in the left shift notation, it can be represented as one left shaped by three.
So it simply means that the third least significant bit in the computer's memory would going to be one
the starting with the position as zero one two three four five up to 15.
All right.
So the takeaway from this discussion is that but as long as the value of a variable is a pure power
of two, then in the binary representation of this number, only one bit that is exactly one bit will
be said, whereas the rest of the bits will be zero.
So using this concept, let us now see that how a single 16 bit variable can be used to track multiple
Boolean attributes.
So let us say, for example, we have a student and we need to track certain properties of the student,
which are of Boolean nature.
For example, whether the student is a native citizen or not, whether the student is male or female,
is the student graduate, is the student postgraduate, etc., etc. You can see that all these seven
questions can be answered in either yes or no.
So let us define the bits which represent each of these seven attributes of the student.
So, for example, let me has to find the constant student native citizen flag.
He had every presence, the flag, and I'm giving it a value as simple as one.
Now, coming to the second attribute of the student, we need to track whether the student is male or
female.
So for that, we were going to define the second bit position, which is nothing but to.
Similarly, is the student graduate for back, we were going to define a constant which represents the
third position, and this is nothing, but it is simple for all right.
And using the same approach, we continue to define the constant value for all of the attributes of
the student.
And if you notice the pattern, all of these constants represent the pure power of two.
All right.
This is it, this is 16, this is 32 and this is 64.
So having said that, on the left hand side, we defined.
The birds, which represent each of the attributes of the student and each of these bird flags is a
power of two.
Now in your program, let us suppose that you get an information in your program that Alex is a native
U.S. citizen as well as Alex is a male as well as Alex has a dual membership as well as Alex is not
a postgraduate, a student.
So in order to keep track of all these Boolean status of the student, Alex, you simply take a under
16 flag.
Now here I am taking a 16 bit flack.
But but if you don't have to track more than it works, then you are free to take you into it.
It will also.
All right.
And if you need to track more than 16 beds, then you can take you in to 32 bit variable also.
So here initially, this flag value is initialized to zero.
So the MAMOUDOU representation of this variable will have all the bit set to zero.
Now, if I say that Alex is a native, you as a citizen, you simply perform the operation of this flag
with the variable, not the value of this variable is one.
So in this binary representation of this variable Alex flag, the big one will be set.
Similarly, if you need to track that the student Alex is a male and the value of the male flag is simply
the second least significant bit.
So you again perform the same operation with the flag male.
And after this operation, the second bit in the variable flag that is Alex Flag will be set to one.
Similarly, if you come to know that Alex has a dual membership, then you simply performed all the
operation of this flag.
So here you have a flag suffix.
So after performing this operation, the bit number six will be set to one in the variable Alex flag.
And finally, if you come to know that Alex is not a postgraduate, then you need to perform this operation
on the variable Alex, which result in the 3rd bit of the variable Alex flag to set to zero.
So here I'm simply setting the bit number three to zero.
So here you have zero one two.
Three separate number three will be set to zero, which is already zero.
All right.
So you can see that in the same flag variable, which is of you and 16, you are able to keep track
of multiple Boolean attributes of the data structure.
Each bit of this flag variable represents some Boolean attribute of a student.
So having gone through this exercise, we are in a position to define sort of macros which will be used
to set the bed on side, set the bed and checking is the bridge set or not?
You can assume.
And as you end up, 32 bit number and bit flag is an integer, which is a power of two and set, but
is a macro rule which should set the and at the bit in the variable end to one.
All right.
Similarly unsaid, it is the opposite of Sudbury and isbut set simply test whether this particular bed
is set in this variable and or not.
So you need to define a while it's all adds and this high profile, you should call up all these definitions
and keep it safe for your other assignments and projects that aren't going further.
In several conditions, you have to initialize a given variable M to the largest possible value that
can hold.
In that case, you can simply initialize the value end by using the hexadecimal notation.
So here are all the 16 bits of the variable and is set to one.
We are setting all the 16 bits of the variable and two.
Here we are specifying the hexadecimal value.
Alternatively, you can also write to you in 16 and is equal to sixty five thousand five hundred and
thirty five.
This is nothing, but it is the decimal equivalent to this hexadecimal representation.
All right.
For F is equal to sixty five thousand five hundred and thirty five in the decimal form.
So after this initialization, the memory representation of the number and would have all the bits at
one.
All right, then it's a homework for you that to write a macro in your file, but solved attach to write
a macro which can toggle dot and at the bit in the no end.
All right.
So if the bet was zero, it should convert to one.
If the bet was one, it should convert to zero.
Here it is again, any value, which is a power of two.
All right.
So this is a homework for you.
So for example, if I invoke this macro toggle bed with value end, whose binary representation at this
point of time is shown by this diagram and the bet flag that I parsed here, let's suppose it is to
restore the power.
Five.
So it simply means that you are about to toggle the number five and the memory representation of the
number.
And so in this diagram, the fifth bit will be this one, and it should toggle this four to one.
All right.
Then again, if I asked you how to perform the complement of a 16 bit and signing number, so in order
to perform the compliment, you have two ways other you perform the Zahau operation with f f f f r you
simply use tilde operator.
In order to compute the complement of a number and complement means all the bets in the no end would
got tangled.
All right.
So keep all these operations on the bit in mind and ride it safely somewhere, because in the interview,
you will be asked questions which require you to use the combination of these macros in order to solve
the problem.
All right.
And another thing is that that bit operations are most frequently asked questions and their interviews.
So this is a very important lecture.
So following this lecture we do is an assignment.
I have prepared a good amount of questions on bet operations and you are required to solve all those
questions that will give you a hands-on on how to do questions, which involves bit level programming.
Some of these questions are the questions which are frequently asked in the interviews, so do the assignment
religiously that follows this lecture radio.